feat: wizarding (#127)
openscd/open-scd-core: doc/0003-wizarding-api.md

# Wizarding API

Date: 2023-07

## Status

Accepted

## Context

Often plugins need a way to display, edit and create SCD elements.
We want to avoid to put too much effort into implementing the same thing over and over again.
Also we want to speed up plugin development by extracting some common functionalities out of the plugins.

> 

Reviewer: Is this limited to SCL editing only? or could it e.g. also contain buttons for functions e.g. auto button e.g. Guess content:

![image](https://github.com/openscd/open-scd-core/assets/7427358/04b76f55-6a05-4fd1-9d30-f29f96217c15)

Reviewer: Oke, any content will work :)

Reviewer: The plug-in author will still be responsible on how the dialog looks?

Reviewer 2: If by plug-in you mean the wizard-library plug-in, then yes. If you mean the plugin that calls the wizard, then no: The idea for the API that we've come up with throughout April 2022 is that the plugin sends a pure declaration of intent: in this case that would be "Please allow the user to create a Substation element in this SCL document!" and then the wizard library would be responsible for displaying some dialog that would allow the user to do that. That dialog, in our default wizard library, would look exactly as you have shown there, with the "Guess content" button. Does that make sense?

Author: Same thinking here. The Wizard-Plugins are 100% responsible of their visuals and content.

## Decision

We will create a new plugin type, wizard, and provide a wizarding API that enables the followings:
- Editor plugins can call wizards to display, edit or create specific SCD elements
- We can provide wizard plugins for specific SCD elements
- In case there are no wizard plugins installed we will have a simple, generic one

### API Specification

In this section we define the lifecycle of a wizard plugin and describe each step.

#### Structure

```txt
┌──────────────────────────────────┐
│Core                              │
│   ┌─────────────┐┌─────────────┐ │
│   │Editor Plugin││Wizard Plugin│ │
│   └─────────────┘└─────────────┘ │
└──────────────────────────────────┘
```

We separate editors and wizards so that wizards can be used by other editors. 
This, of course, could create a coupling between plugins, so a default or 
fallback wizard is necessary to handle all elements e.g.: a generic XML editor

#### Lifecycle

```txt
┌─────────────────┐ ┌───────────┐┌─────────────────┐     ┃
│  Editor Plugin  │ │   Core    ││  Wizard Plugin  │     ┃  LEGEND

> └─────────────────┘ └───────────┘└─────────────────┘     ┃  ┌───────────┐

Reviewer 2: Does "Editor Plugin" in this case include a menu plugin?

Author: no, I was just focusing on the the "editor vs wizard" aspect :)
I could include it if leaving it out only creates confusion

         │                │               │              ┃  └─────┬─────┘
         │                │◀───register───│              ┃        │
         │───register────▶│               │              ┃        │
         │                │               │              ┃        │
         │   requests a   │               │              ┃        │
         │───wizard for──▶│               │              ┃
         │    a given     │  asks wizard  │              ┃
         │                │───if it can ─▶│              ┃  ──<desc.>  ─▶    Initiated action
         │                │ handle given  │              ┃
         │                │               │              ┃
         │                │◀ ─ ─answer ─ ─│              ┃  ─ <answer>  ▶    Answer to an action
         │                │               │              ┃
         │                │   initiates   │              ┃
         │                │    wizard     │              ┃            ┌─┐
         │                │───with the ──▶│              ┃            │ │
         │                │     given    ┌┴┐             ┃            │ │

>          │                │    element   │ │             ┃            │ │    Internal process

Author: This would be out of scope, I would say.
Is there an option that would greatly affect the rest, and can we delay the decision?

>          │                │    element   │ │             ┃            │ │    Internal process

Author: It is necessary to keep this in mind, but my initial feeling is that we can solve this in a compatible way

         │                │              │ │wizarding    ┃            │ │
         │                │              │ │process      ┃            │ │
         │                │              │ │             ┃            └─┘
         │                │              │ │             ┃
         │                │              └┬┘             ┃
         │                │               ├──┐           ┃
         │                │               │  │           ┃
         │                │               closes         ┃
         │                │               itself         ┃
         │                │               │  │           ┃
         │                │               ◀──┘           ┃
         │                │               │              ┃

>          X                X               X              ┃

Reviewer 2: For invoking the next wizard on the deque (in order to know when to render a wizard plugin at all, and to move on to the next wizard) and for deciding when to stop rendering the wizard selector button (which will be needed to achieve feature parity with the current legacy open-scd implementation) we will need to know when the wizard is done with its work. An event that says "I'm done" would likely be needed here.

Author: would you prefer an event after the closure or an event that asks the core to close the wizard?

Reviewer 2: I don't have a preference, but it's a decision I would really want us to think about the consequences of. Whether any wizards ever could need any cleanup, or whether "well, you're not being rendered any more now!" is always going to be acceptable as a way for core to close wizards. In the latter case I think I'd prefer that since it's simpler and doesn't require for the wizard itself to do any opening or closing, just to always render its stuff. What do you think?

Author: I agree and I have already made changes

```

##### Registration

Registering a wizard plugin happens the same way as registering another plugin.
We will add the wizard type to our `PluginSet`.
```diff
- export type PluginSet = { menu: Plugin[]; editor: Plugin[] };
+ export type PluginSet = { menu: Plugin[]; editor: Plugin[], wizard: Plugin[] };
```

> Wizards must have two public static functions called `CanInspect` and `CanCreate`.
> `Core` will call these functions when it tries to figure out which wizard supports
> the given element and action.
> ```ts
> type CanInspect: (tagName: string) => boolean
> type CanCreate: (tagName: string) => boolean

Reviewer 2: Why not name these "Edit" and "Create", respectively? Also, isn't a name that starts with a lowercase letter more usual for methods?

```suggestion
Wizards must have two static methods called `canEdit` and `canCreate`.
`Core` will call these methods when it tries to figure out which wizard supports
the given element and action.
```ts
type canEdit: (tagName: string) => boolean
type canCreate: (tagName: string) => boolean
```

Reviewer 2: I didn't see the "type" keyword in those lines. In general I wouldn't define named types for those, but wherever we do define named types, let's definitely capitalise them, since that's the TS and JS convention. Currently in open-scd, we don't capitalise any static fields, the same way open-wc, lit, and mwc do: They have all properties and methods start with lowercase regardless of whether they're defined on the class or on the instance, just like all constants and functions.

Author: I have tried to make the description clearer and already changed them to lowercase.
The types were just intended as a way of description, and I would only include it in the code if they help to make things more understandable.

```

##### Requests

We request a wizard through events.

For viewing and/or editing purposes we can request an inspection.  
The event is called `oscd-wizard-inspection-request` and its details look like this:
```ts
type WizardInspectionRequest = WizardRequest & {
  element: Element,
}
```

The other possible request is to create a new element under a parent element.  
The event is called `oscd-wizard-creation-request` and its details look like this
```ts
type WizardCreationRequest = WizardRequest & {
  parent: Element,
  tagName?: string,
}
```

Both event detail can contain an additional `stuff` for flexibility. `stuff` can be something
that the wizard defines for additional configurations (e.g.: display it in readonly mode),
or the editor can provide additional information about the element.

> **⚠️ WARNING:** Please only use `stuff` if there is no other way.
> It creates a tight coupling with a specific wizard or editor and it cannot be

> > guaranteed that your expectation about the `stuff` will be met!

Reviewer 2: Why do we need to introduce an extra background hatch to the event that comes with a warning not to use it? What use case are we solving by this? "for flexibility" sounds scarily vague to me. The current problems with the original wizard API came about exactly because we designed it "for flexibility".

The proposal in the Wizard API issue from last year's April was exactly to make the event a pure declaration of intent to edit or create a particular element. For what purpose do we need something other than that?

Reviewer 2: I would generally suggest that whether something should be editable or not should be up to the distribution. So for example, my distribution might include a wizard library that gets information about the current stage of the engineering process from the file and information about the user role from, say, an OpenID connect provider, and then shows read-only wizards for those elements which can not be edited by a user with this role at this stage of the engineering process. So if we want e.g. read only views in general, let's include a read only wizard library. This would mesh well with the declaration of user intent "I want to edit/create this element" that was the idea behind the API.

Do we believe "I want to view this element but I would be really angry if I could also edit it, so please don't allow me to do that!" to be a separate possible user intent? I currently don't see the use case for that, but if we do, I think it would be prudent to introduce a third type of wizard request just for viewing. What do you think about all this?

Author: I think you are right. This is more like a UX problem maybe and we have to decide on a case-by-case basis.

> **ℹ️ INFO**: More about other alternatives of requests: 
> [Alternatives for Requests](#alternatives-of-requests)

##### Finding Available Wizards

When `Core` receives one of the above mentioned events it will go and ask the
wizards if they can handle the element and action.
It will call:
- `CanInspect` if the event is `oscd-wizard-inspection-request` 
- `CanCreate` if the event is `oscd-wizard-creation-request`.

##### Initiation

In case of inspection the wizard would get the element. 
```html
<oscd-wizard-type-templates .element={element} .stuff={stuff}></oscd-wizard-type-templates>
```

If we want to create a new element it will get the parent element and the new tag name it has to create. Something like this:
```html
<oscd-wizard-type-templates .parentElement={parentElement} tag-name="DO" .stuff={stuff}></oscd-wizard-type-templates>
```

##### Wizarding Process

This part happens entirely in the wizard plugin. 
It can modify the XML document or just display it in some user-friendly way.

##### Self Closing

The wizard decides when it is finished and closes itself. 

`Core` has always the possibility to close the wizard. 

> For example when clicking on the backdrop of a dialog.

Reviewer 2: As commented above, we'd likely need some API to let core know when the wizard has done its work.

----

## Considered Options

### Define handled tag names in the plugin configuration

An alternative to the `CanHandle` static function is to define the
tag names in the plugin description e.g: in a string array called `handledTags`.

```ts
type WizardPlugin = Plugin & {
    handledTags: string[];
}
```

The advantage is that we can enforce their definition,

> what we cannot do with a static functions as of now.

Reviewer 2: What do you mean by "enforce their definition"? Who would do the enforcing, and how?

Author: TypeScript would, wouldn't it?
If you want to define a wizard plugin you would need to define ´handledTags´

Reviewer 2: Plugins don't need to be written using TypeScript at all, I've written them in straght JS before, but a plugin could just as well be written in ClojureScript or Elm, for example.

The disadvantages is that we cannot define the tags dynamically
Another neutral difference is that the handled tags definition is at
the registration point and not in the plugin's static function.
So it can happen that the plugin changes which tags it can handle
but we forget to change its configuration.

### Alternatives of Requests

> #### [wizard-event.ts  ↗](https://github.com/ca-d/open-scd-core/blob/add-wizards/foundation/wizard-event.ts) by Christian Dinkle

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### [wizard-event.ts  ↗](https://github.com/ca-d/open-scd-core/blob/add-wizards/foundation/wizard-event.ts) by Christian Dinkel
```

In this definition there is only one event (`oscd-wizard-request`)
and two different event details (`CreateRequest` and `EditRequest`).
This way the plugins need to determine themselves which
event they got by examining each request.
With two different events plugins can listen on one or both and can be sure
which event they get without examining the event itself.
Plugin developers may forget that they can get two different types of event details,
but if we have two different events with always the same type of payload,

> there is nothing to forget.

Reviewer 2: Do you mean forgetting in case wizard plugin developers do not look at the API and also choose not to use TypeScript? How likely do we think that case is? Do we want to design our API around it?

Do you also see the advantage of more straightforward backwards-compatible API growth in the future with this approach?
